State is actually not a React specific concept
but it is a key concept in React as well.
And here in ExpenseItem,
we have a scenario where we wanna use
that built-in state concept.
Because this title here
which changes when the clickHandler executes
is actually data that should result
in this component being re-evaluated
and re-drawn on the screen when it's changes,
when that's title data changes.
And by default, regular variables like this one,
are not triggering such a re-evaluation.
React doesn't care about that.
If you have a variable in your component function
and the that variable changes, React ignores it.
It doesn't care about that, that code executes, sure,
but the overall component function doesn't execute again
just because some variable changed.
And as a side note, even if it would execute again,
of course then title, this variable,
would all just be retreated
and re initialized to the props value.
Because as part of this component function
we are creating this title variable.
So even if that would happen
we wouldn't reach the desired result
but we don't even need to think about that
because it is not happening.
This ExpenseItem component function currently
is not called a second time after the initial rendering
just because a click occurred
or because a variable changed
does not trigger this component function to run again.
So to tell React that it should run it again,
we need to import something from the React library.
And we do it as by adding a so-called named import.
This here, is the default import.
Now, we can add a comma
and curly braces and between the curly braces
we can now extract specifically named things
from the React library.
Here we imported the overall React object,
now we want to import single pieces from the React library.
And we want to import a function here,
a function which is called useState.
This is a function provided by the React library
and this function allows us to define values
as state where changes to these values should reflect
in the component function being called again,
which is a key difference
to the regular variable we're using here.
Now, how do we use this useState function though?
Well, it's very simple.
Inside of our component function and that's important,
we have to do that inside of this function.
We just call useState.
And useState is a so-called React hook.
There are other hooks as well,
and of course we are going to learn
about all important hooks for all at this course
but that is one of the most important ones.
And all these React hooks can be recognized
by the fact that they start with the word "use"
in their name,
and all these hooks must only be called
inside of React component functions like ExpenseItem.
They can't be called outside of these functions, like this.
And they all just shouldn't be called
in any nested functions.
They must be called directly
inside such component functions.
There is one exception which we'll talk about later
but for the moment, that is what you should keep in mind.
Now, useState doesn't work just like that.
Instead, useState once a default state value,
because with useState
we basically create a special kind of variable,
you could say,
a variable where changes will lead
this component function to be called again.
And of course we can therefore assign an initial value
for that special variable,
just as we're assigning a value here
for does regular variable.
So here, my initial value is props.title.
And we simply pass this as an argument to useState.
Now does special variable is created.
Of course, we also want to be able to use that variable,
we want to be able to use it down here, for example
and therefore useState also returns something.
It gives us access to this special variable.
However, it does not just return that,
it also returns a function which we can then call
to assign a new value to that variable.
So we'll not be assigning values like this
with the equal sign,
instead, we will be assigning new values
by calling a function.
That's just how this state variable thing works.
And for that useState actually returns an array
where the first value is the variable itself,
you could say, the value itself.
And the second element in the array
is that updating function.
And we can use a modern JavaScript feature
called array destructuring, which looks like this,
to store both elements in separate variables
or constants, and here I'll use constants.
And I'll come back to why it's a constant in a second.
Now you can choose any names of your choice
because for a radius structuring, it's just your order
which matters and all named as title and setTitle.
The first element, as I just said,
is a point at that managed value.
So initially at props title, the value stored
in props title,
and the second element here
is a function which we can later call to set a new title,
hence this name, which I chose.
Both names are up to you,
but the convention is to use something
which describes the value
as a name for this first element, since that is the value
and then set, and then that name repeated
just with a capital starting character here.
This capital T for that function which updates the value.
That's the convention
on how you name these two elements returned by useState.
And useState, this hook, always returns an array
with exactly two elements.
That's always the case.
And it's always the case
that the first element is the current state value.
And the second element is a function for updating that.
Now with that, we can remove that title variable
and we can also remove that value assignment
in clickHandler.
And we can still use title like this down there in JSX.
So if we now save it like this,
we still see toilet paper here.
So that hasn't changed,
but of course the button still doesn't do anything
because at the moment we're never updating this.
Now, as I said, with the value returned by useState,
we're not going to assign a new value with an equal sign.
Instead, we assign a new value by calling setTitle.
So by calling this state updating function
and then we just passed a new value
as argument, in this case updated.
Now, why does it work like this though?
Why do we have this state updating function
instead of assigning a new value like this?
The reason for that is, that calling this function
does not just assign a new value to some variable,
but that instead it is a special variable to begin with.
It's managed by React somewhere in memory.
And when we call this state updating function,
this special variable will not just receive a new value
but, and that's important,
the component function in which you called
this state updating function.
And in which you initialized your state with useState
will be executed again.
And that is exactly what we need.
We want to call this component function again
when our state changes.
And by calling this state updating function
that's happening.
Because by calling this function,
you're telling React that you wanna assign a new value
to this state.
And that then also tells React
that the component in which this staid was registered
with useState should be re-evaluated.
And therefore React will go ahead
and execute this component function again,
and therefore also evaluate this JSX code again.
And then it will draw any changes which it's detects
compared to the last time it evaluated this onto the screen.
So if we now save everything,
if I click Change Title,
you see the title changes to updated
for the ExpenseItem in which we're doing this.
And that's now how this works.
Now you will notice that these console locks
still show the title before it was updated.
The reason for this is that calling
this state updating function
actually doesn't change the value right away,
but instead schedules this state update.
So in the very next line thereafter,
this new value isn't available yet.
That's why we see the old value being locked
even though we updated it before logging.
But you do see
that eventually this component is called again
and is evaluated again.
And that therefore we see our updated value on the screen.
That's how React state works.
And this is another key concept in React.
If you have data, which might change,
and where changes to that data should be reflected
on the user interface
then you need state
because a regular variables will not do the trick
with state, however you can set and change values.
And when they do change,
React will re-evaluate the component
in which the state was registered.
And only that component, by the way
not any other components,
just this component in which this state was registered.
Now let's take a closer look
at the state and why we use const.
And how does all works in detail.